content/tutorials/websocket-tutorial.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Using The Modeling API'
excerpt: This tutorial is a step-by-step walkthrough of using the modeling API to create a cube.
langs: ['py']
---

This tutorial is a step-by-step walkthrough of using the KittyCAD Modeling API to design a cube and take a snapshot of it for you to view. This tutorial will be using Python, but you can use any language that supports websockets. If you would like to download the full code as a reference, you can <a href="/code-samples/websocketexample.py" download="kittycad-websocket.py">download it here</a>.

## References

While you follow this tutorial, feel free to reference our <a href="https://zoo.dev/docs/api/modeling/open-a-websocket-which-accepts-modeling-commands?lang=python" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">API Docs</a> or our <a href="https://python.api.docs.zoo.dev/_autosummary/kittycad.models.html#module-kittycad.models" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Python Library</a>.

## Prerequisites

For this tutorial, you will need to <a href="https://python.api.docs.zoo.dev/_autosummary/kittycad.models.html#module-kittycad.models">download Python</a>. Make sure to download the correct version for your operating system.

### Generate an API Token

For any API call, you have to have a KittyCAD API token. Click <a href="https://zoo.dev/account/api-tokens" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">here</a> to navigate to your account page to generate an API token. Once you have your API token, you will use that token for your API calls. If you have multiple API tokens, it does not matter which one you use. **Do not share your API token with anyone.**

### Using the Python KittyCAD Library

To use the KittyCAD API, you will need to install the KittyCAD Python library. You can do this by running the following command in your terminal:

```bash
pip3 install kittycad
```

You can also navigate <a href="https://pypi.org/project/kittycad/" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">here</a> and download it from the PyPl website.

### Setting up the Virtual Environment

Virtual environments are a way to isolate your Python environment from your system's Python environment. This is useful for when you are working on multiple projects that require different versions of Python or different libraries. It is a good practice if you are working on multiple Python projects. To create a virtual environment, run the following command in your terminal:

```bash
pip3 install virtualenv
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
```

This will create a virtual environment in the `venv` directory and activate it. 

### Setting your API Token as an Environment Variable

To use your API token, you will need to set it as an environment variable. Without it, you will not be able to call any API endpoints for KittyCAD. To do this, run the following command in your terminal (replace `<your-api-token>` with your API token):

```bash
export KITTYCAD_API_TOKEN=<your-api-token>
```

## Creating The Python Script

We are going to build each section in detail and build the Python script piece by piece. 

### Helpful Libraries

First, we are going to import some helpful libraries that we will use throughout the tutorial.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/1_sample.py.part"
```

* `json` - This is a built-in Python library that allows us to work with JSON data.
* `os` - This is a built-in Python library that allows us to work with the operating system.
* `uuid` - This is a built-in Python library that allows us to generate UUIDs.

### Client Setup

In order to use our Python Library, we need to authenticate with the KittyCAD API. First, we are going to import the client into Python

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/2_sample.py.part"
```

### All Imports

If you would like to reference our standard library, you can reference it <a href="https://python.api.docs.zoo.dev/_autosummary/kittycad.models.html#module-kittycad.models" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">here</a>.

None of the following imports are required, but they are very helpful for avoiding typos and making sure that you are using the correct types.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/3_sample.py.part"
```

### Designing a Cube

To start designing a cube, let's make a function called `make_cube()`. We will start by calling the client, creating a UUID for our sketch, and opening the websocket.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/4_sample.py.part"
```

Next, we will start to draw a square on a sketch. So in the next section, we will be:
* Creating a sketch
* Moving the pen to the bottom left corner
* Drawing a path to the right, up, left.
* Closing the sketch.

#### Drawing the Square

First, let's start the path. All of the modeling commands take two parameters at the top level. 
* `cmd` - This is the command that you want to run (start_path, take_snapshot, etc.)
* `cmd_id` - This is the ID of the command. This is used to identify the command when you receive a response from the server. The ID we will use is a UUID. This is helpful for referencing th ecommand later on.

(continued from before)
```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/5_sample.py.part"
```

Now that we have started the path, let's draw the square. Our first modeling command will be to move the pen, then start drawing the square starting from the bottom-left corner.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/6_sample.py.part"
```

We have now drawn a square. Now, let's extrude the square into a cube. To do this, we will use the modeling command `extrude`. This command takes three required parameters:
* cap - This is a boolean that determines whether or not to cap the extrusion.
* distance - This is the distance to extrude the sketch.
* target - This is the target sketch to extrude.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/7_sample.py.part"
```

We have now extruded the sqaure into a cube. Before we take a snapshot, let's get back the messages from the server. To do this, we will use the `recv()` method on the websocket. This will return a `WebSocketResponse` object. This isn't necessary, but it is helpful to see what the server is sending back to us.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/8_sample.py.part"
```

### Taking a Snapshot

Lastly, we are going to orient the camera and take a snapshot of the cube we just made. To do this, we will use the `default_camera_look_at` and the `take_snapshot` modeling command. `default_camera_look_at` takes three required parameters:

* center - This is the center of what the camera is looking at.
* up - This is the up vector of the camera.
* vantage - This is where the camera is placed.

`take_snapshot` takes one required parameter:

* Format - This is the format of the image. This can be either `png` or `jpeg`.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/9_sample.py.part"
```

Now, let's write the contents of the snapshot to a file. To do this, we will use the `write()` method on the `WebSocketResponse` object. This will write the contents of the snapshot to a file. We will also close the websocket. First, we will search through the messages and find the one whos type matches `"take_snapshot"`. Once found, we will write the contents of the snapshot to a file. This will save the file in the same directory as your python script.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/10_sample.py.part"
```

You should now have a snapshot.png file that displays your cube! Your image should look like like this:

<img src="/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/cube.png" alt="Cube" />

Congrats! You have now created a cube using the KittyCAD Modeling API! You can download the full code <a href="/code-samples/websocketexample.py" download="kittycad-websocket.py">here</a>.

Commit message:

update glossary kc references and add full code websocket tutorial (#115)

content/tutorials/websocket-tutorial.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Using The Modeling API'
excerpt: This tutorial is a step-by-step walkthrough of using the modeling API to create a cube.
langs: ['py']
---

This tutorial is a step-by-step walkthrough that demonstrates how to use our design API (KittyCAD) to design a cube and take a snapshot of it for you to view. This tutorial will be using Python, but you can use any language that supports websockets. If you would like to download the full code as a reference, you can <a href="/code-samples/websocketexample.py" download="kittycad-websocket.py">download it here</a>.

## References

While you follow this tutorial, feel free to reference our <a href="https://zoo.dev/docs/api/modeling/open-a-websocket-which-accepts-modeling-commands?lang=python" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">API Docs</a> or our <a href="https://python.api.docs.zoo.dev/_autosummary/kittycad.models.html#module-kittycad.models" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Python Library</a>.

## Prerequisites

For this tutorial, you will need to <a href="https://python.api.docs.zoo.dev/_autosummary/kittycad.models.html#module-kittycad.models">download Python</a>. Make sure to download the correct version for your operating system.

### Generate an API Token

For any API call, you have to have a Zoo API token. Click <a href="https://zoo.dev/account/api-tokens" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">here</a> to navigate to your account page to generate an API token. Once you have your API token, you will use that token for your API calls. If you have multiple API tokens, it does not matter which one you use. **Do not share your API token with anyone.**

### Using the Python KittyCAD Library

To use the KittyCAD API for this tutorial, you will need to install the KittyCAD Python library. You can do this by running the following command in your terminal:

```bash
pip3 install kittycad
```

You can also navigate <a href="https://pypi.org/project/kittycad/" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">here</a> and download it from the PyPl website.

### Setting up the Virtual Environment

Virtual environments are a way to isolate your Python environment from your system's Python environment. This is useful for when you are working on multiple projects that require different versions of Python or different libraries. It is a good practice if you are working on multiple Python projects. To create a virtual environment, run the following command in your terminal:

```bash
pip3 install virtualenv
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
```

This will create a virtual environment in the `venv` directory and activate it. 

### Setting your API Token as an Environment Variable

To use your API token, you will need to set it as an environment variable. Without it, you will not be able to call any API endpoints. To do this, run the following command in your terminal (replace `<your-api-token>` with your API token):

```bash
export KITTYCAD_API_TOKEN=<your-api-token>
```

## Creating The Python Script

We are going to build each section in detail and build the Python script piece by piece. 

### Helpful Libraries

First, we are going to import some helpful libraries that we will use throughout the tutorial.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/1_sample.py.part"
```

* `json` - This is a built-in Python library that allows us to work with JSON data.
* `os` - This is a built-in Python library that allows us to work with the operating system.
* `uuid` - This is a built-in Python library that allows us to generate UUIDs.

### Client Setup

In order to use our Python Library, we need to authenticate with the KittyCAD API. First, we are going to import the client into Python

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/2_sample.py.part"
```

### All Imports

If you would like to reference our standard library, you can reference it <a href="https://python.api.docs.zoo.dev/_autosummary/kittycad.models.html#module-kittycad.models" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">here</a>.

None of the following imports are required, but they are very helpful for avoiding typos and making sure that you are using the correct types.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/3_sample.py.part"
```

### Designing a Cube

To start designing a cube, let's make a function called `make_cube()`. We will start by calling the client, creating a UUID for our sketch, and opening the websocket.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/4_sample.py.part"
```

Next, we will start to draw a square on a sketch. So in the next section, we will be:
* Creating a sketch
* Moving the pen to the bottom left corner
* Drawing a path to the right, up, left.
* Closing the sketch.

#### Drawing the Square

First, let's start the path. All of the modeling commands take two parameters at the top level. 
* `cmd` - This is the command that you want to run (start_path, take_snapshot, etc.)
* `cmd_id` - This is the ID of the command. This is used to identify the command when you receive a response from the server. The ID we will use is a UUID. This is helpful for referencing th ecommand later on.

(continued from before)
```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/5_sample.py.part"
```

Now that we have started the path, let's draw the square. Our first modeling command will be to move the pen, then start drawing the square starting from the bottom-left corner.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/6_sample.py.part"
```

We have now drawn a square. Now, let's extrude the square into a cube. To do this, we will use the modeling command `extrude`. This command takes three required parameters:
* cap - This is a boolean that determines whether or not to cap the extrusion.
* distance - This is the distance to extrude the sketch.
* target - This is the target sketch to extrude.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/7_sample.py.part"
```

We have now extruded the sqaure into a cube. Before we take a snapshot, let's get back the messages from the server. To do this, we will use the `recv()` method on the websocket. This will return a `WebSocketResponse` object. This isn't necessary, but it is helpful to see what the server is sending back to us.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/8_sample.py.part"
```

### Taking a Snapshot

Lastly, we are going to orient the camera and take a snapshot of the cube we just made. To do this, we will use the `default_camera_look_at` and the `take_snapshot` modeling command. `default_camera_look_at` takes three required parameters:

* center - This is the center of what the camera is looking at.
* up - This is the up vector of the camera.
* vantage - This is where the camera is placed.

`take_snapshot` takes one required parameter:

* Format - This is the format of the image. This can be either `png` or `jpeg`.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/9_sample.py.part"
```

Now, let's write the contents of the snapshot to a file. To do this, we will use the `write()` method on the `WebSocketResponse` object. This will write the contents of the snapshot to a file. We will also close the websocket. First, we will search through the messages and find the one whos type matches `"take_snapshot"`. Once found, we will write the contents of the snapshot to a file. This will save the file in the same directory as your python script.

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/10_sample.py.part"
```

You should now have a snapshot.png file that displays your cube! Your image should look like like this:

<img src="/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/cube.png" alt="Cube" />

Congrats! You have now created a cube using the KittyCAD Modeling API! If you'd like access to the full code, you can copy it below.

### Full Code

```py data-file="public/litterbox_assets/tutorials/websocket_tutorial/websocketexample.py"
```
