content/pages/docs/enterprise/saml/index.mdx, before:

---
title: 'SAML configuration reference'
excerpt: 'View SAML metadata for your organization or enterprise on Zoo, and you can learn more about available SAML attributes and response requirements.'
---

## About SAML configuration

To use SAML single sign-on (SSO) for authentication to Zoo, you must configure
both your external SAML identity provider (IdP) and your enterprise or
organization on zoo.dev. In a SAML configuration, Zoo functions as a SAML service
provider (SP). 

Zoo provides integration according to the SAML 2.0 specification. For more 
information, see the [SAML Wiki](https://wiki.oasis-open.org/security) on the 
OASIS website.

You must enter unique values from your SAML IdP when configuring SAML SSO for 
Zoo, and you must also enter unique values from Zoo on your IdP.  

## SAML metadata

The SP metadata for Zoo is available for either organizations or enterprises
with SAML SSO. Zoo uses the urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:bindings:HTTP-POST binding.

### Organizations

You can configure SAML SSO for an individual organization in your enterprise. 

The SP metadata for an organization on zoo.dev is available at
[`/org/saml/idp`](https://zoo.dev/docs/api/orgs/get-the-saml-identity-provider).

| Value | Other names | Description	Example |
|-------|-------------|---------------------|
| SP Entity ID | SP URL, audience restriction | The UUID for this SAML identity provider |
| SP Assertion Consumer Service (ACS) URL |	Reply, recipient, or destination URL |	URL where IdP sends SAML responses	`POST https://api.zoo.dev/auth/saml/providers/{entity_id}/login`, where the Entity ID is the same as above |
| SP Single Sign-On (SSO) URL	|	URL where IdP begins SSO |	`GET https://api.zoo.dev/auth/saml/providers/{entity_id}/login`, where the Entity ID is the same as above |


When you enter your email into https://zoo.dev/signin it will automatically
redirect you to the SP Single Sign-On URL as denoted above. This way you do not
need to remember it every time you login.

## SAML attributes

The following SAML attributes are available for Zoo.


| Name |	Required |	Description |
|------|-----------|---------------|
| `NameID`| ✔		|	A persistent user identifier. Any persistent name identifier format may be used. |
| `email`	|	✔		| The email address for the user. | 
| `first_name` | ✔	| The first name of the user. | 
| `last_name` | ✔	 | The last name of the user. |
| `SessionNotOnOrAfter` | ✘ |		The date that Zoo invalidates the associated session. After invalidation, the person must authenticate once again to access your enterprise's resources. For more information, see "Session duration and timeout." |

> Note: It's important to use a human-readable, persistent identifier for `NameID`. Using a transient identifier format like urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:nameid-format:transient will result in re-linking of accounts on every sign-in, which can be detrimental to authorization management. 

## SAML response requirements

Zoo requires that the response message from your IdP fulfill the following requirements.

- Your IdP must protect each assertion in the response with a digital signature. You can accomplish this by signing each individual `<Assertion>` element or by
  signing the `<Response>` element.
- Your IdP must provide a `<NameID>` element as part of the `<Subject>` element. 
  You may use any persistent name identifier format.
- Your IdP must include the `Recipient` attribute, which must be set to the ACS URL. The following example demonstrates the attribute.

      <samlp:Response ...>
        <saml:Assertion ...>
          <saml:Subject>
            <saml:NameID ...>...</saml:NameID>
            <saml:SubjectConfirmation ...>
              <saml:SubjectConfirmationData Recipient="https://api.zoo.dev/auth/saml/providers/{entity_id}/login" .../>
            </saml:SubjectConfirmation>
          </saml:Subject>
          <saml:AttributeStatement>
            <saml:Attribute FriendlyName="USERNAME-ATTRIBUTE" ...>
              <saml:AttributeValue>monalisa</saml:AttributeValue>
            </saml:Attribute>
          </saml:AttributeStatement>
        </saml:Assertion>
      </samlp:Response>



## Session duration and timeout

To prevent a person from authenticating with your IdP and staying authorized 
indefinitely, Zoo periodically invalidates the session for each user account 
with access to your enterprise's resources. After invalidation, the person must 
authenticate with your IdP once again.

By default, if your IdP does not assert a value for the `SessionNotOnOrAfter` 
attribute, Zoo invalidates a session 24 hours after successful authentication
with your IdP.

Zoo will support a customized session duration if your IdP
provides the option to configure a `SessionNotOnOrAfter` attribute and value.

If you define a customized session duration value less than 24 hours,
Zoo may prompt people to authenticate every time Zoo
initiates a redirect.

To prevent authentication errors, we recommend a minimum session duration 
of 4 hours. 

> Notes:
>
> - For Azure AD, the configurable lifetime policy for SAML tokens does not control
>   session timeout for Zoo.
> - Okta does not currently send the `SessionNotOnOrAfter` attribute during 
>   SAML authentication with Zoo. For more information, contact Okta.

Commit message:

add single logout
Signed-off-by: Jess Frazelle <github@jessfraz.com>

content/pages/docs/enterprise/saml/index.mdx, after:

---
title: 'SAML configuration reference'
excerpt: 'View SAML metadata for your organization or enterprise on Zoo, and you can learn more about available SAML attributes and response requirements.'
---

## About SAML configuration

To use SAML single sign-on (SSO) for authentication to Zoo, you must configure
both your external SAML identity provider (IdP) and your enterprise or
organization on zoo.dev. In a SAML configuration, Zoo functions as a SAML service
provider (SP). 

Zoo provides integration according to the SAML 2.0 specification. For more 
information, see the [SAML Wiki](https://wiki.oasis-open.org/security) on the 
OASIS website.

You must enter unique values from your SAML IdP when configuring SAML SSO for 
Zoo, and you must also enter unique values from Zoo on your IdP.  

## SAML metadata

The SP metadata for Zoo is available for either organizations or enterprises
with SAML SSO. Zoo uses the urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:bindings:HTTP-POST binding.

### Organizations

You can configure SAML SSO for an individual organization in your enterprise. 

The SP metadata for an organization on zoo.dev is available at
[`/org/saml/idp`](https://zoo.dev/docs/api/orgs/get-the-saml-identity-provider).

| Value | Other names | Description	Example |
|-------|-------------|---------------------|
| SP Entity ID | SP URL, audience restriction | The UUID for this SAML identity provider |
| SP Assertion Consumer Service (ACS) URL |	Reply, recipient, or destination URL |	URL where IdP sends SAML responses	`POST https://api.zoo.dev/auth/saml/providers/{entity_id}/login`, where the Entity ID is the same as above |
| SP Single Sign-On (SSO) URL	|	URL where IdP begins SSO |	`GET https://api.zoo.dev/auth/saml/providers/{entity_id}/login`, where the Entity ID is the same as above |
| SP Single Log-Out (SLO) URL | URL where a user is logged out | `GET https://api.zoo.dev/logout`. This will expire the current session for the authenticated user. |


When you enter your email into https://zoo.dev/signin it will automatically
redirect you to the SP Single Sign-On URL as denoted above. This way you do not
need to remember it every time you login.

## SAML attributes

The following SAML attributes are available for Zoo.


| Name |	Required |	Description |
|------|-----------|---------------|
| `NameID`| ✔		|	A persistent user identifier. Any persistent name identifier format may be used. |
| `email`	|	✔		| The email address for the user. | 
| `first_name` | ✔	| The first name of the user. | 
| `last_name` | ✔	 | The last name of the user. |
| `SessionNotOnOrAfter` | ✘ |		The date that Zoo invalidates the associated session. After invalidation, the person must authenticate once again to access your enterprise's resources. For more information, see "Session duration and timeout." |

> Note: It's important to use a human-readable, persistent identifier for `NameID`. Using a transient identifier format like urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:nameid-format:transient will result in re-linking of accounts on every sign-in, which can be detrimental to authorization management. 

## SAML response requirements

Zoo requires that the response message from your IdP fulfill the following requirements.

- Your IdP must protect each assertion in the response with a digital signature. You can accomplish this by signing each individual `<Assertion>` element or by
  signing the `<Response>` element.
- Your IdP must provide a `<NameID>` element as part of the `<Subject>` element. 
  You may use any persistent name identifier format.
- Your IdP must include the `Recipient` attribute, which must be set to the ACS URL. The following example demonstrates the attribute.

      <samlp:Response ...>
        <saml:Assertion ...>
          <saml:Subject>
            <saml:NameID ...>...</saml:NameID>
            <saml:SubjectConfirmation ...>
              <saml:SubjectConfirmationData Recipient="https://api.zoo.dev/auth/saml/providers/{entity_id}/login" .../>
            </saml:SubjectConfirmation>
          </saml:Subject>
          <saml:AttributeStatement>
            <saml:Attribute FriendlyName="USERNAME-ATTRIBUTE" ...>
              <saml:AttributeValue>monalisa</saml:AttributeValue>
            </saml:Attribute>
          </saml:AttributeStatement>
        </saml:Assertion>
      </samlp:Response>



## Session duration and timeout

To prevent a person from authenticating with your IdP and staying authorized 
indefinitely, Zoo periodically invalidates the session for each user account 
with access to your enterprise's resources. After invalidation, the person must 
authenticate with your IdP once again.

By default, if your IdP does not assert a value for the `SessionNotOnOrAfter` 
attribute, Zoo invalidates a session 24 hours after successful authentication
with your IdP.

Zoo will support a customized session duration if your IdP
provides the option to configure a `SessionNotOnOrAfter` attribute and value.

If you define a customized session duration value less than 24 hours,
Zoo may prompt people to authenticate every time Zoo
initiates a redirect.

To prevent authentication errors, we recommend a minimum session duration 
of 4 hours. 

> Notes:
>
> - For Azure AD, the configurable lifetime policy for SAML tokens does not control
>   session timeout for Zoo.
> - Okta does not currently send the `SessionNotOnOrAfter` attribute during 
>   SAML authentication with Zoo. For more information, contact Okta.
