---
title: 'KCL: A Programming Language for Parametric CAD'
shortTitle: 'KCL'
excerpt: |
    An introduction to KCL, Zoo's text-based programming language for CAD.
coverImage: '/documentation-assets/zoo-banner.png'
date: '2025-05-20T02:00:00.000Z'
author:
    name: Adam Chalmers
    picture: ''
ogImage:
    url: ''
---

## 1 Introducing KCL

The KittyCAD Programming Language (or just KCL) is a programming language, but a very unusual one.
Most languages define digital artifacts like software. This language defines real-world artifacts,
like gears and engines.

When you design a model in CAD software, clicking on various buttons and drawing out various shapes,
the CAD software is constantly updating some hidden internal model, represented as a complicated
series of 3D equations and algebraic relations. You, the user, never get to see or edit that model
directly. You issue commands with the user interface, e.g. “sketch this square” or “sweep this
circle along that path”, and the CAD software updates its internal model, then renders that model as
a 3D visual on your screen. At the end of your session, you save or export your model, and the CAD
software converts its hidden internal model into some file format that your filesystem can save.
Maybe that file format can be read by other software, or maybe just by the one specific CAD suite
you’re using.

Most CAD systems never show you their internal model. You can only change it (with your mouse and
keyboard) and view a simplified 3D representation of it on your screen. Zoo is different. KCL _is_
the fundamental model underpinning Zoo. If you want to know what the software truly knows about your
model, just read the KCL. There’s no hidden information. It’s all there in the KCL.

## 2 Advantages of Text: Readability, Collaboration, and Automation

Existing CAD systems store their model as complex algebraic data that can’t be read by humans – not
easily, and sometimes not at all, because it’s stored in binary instead of text. We knew we wanted
Zoo to fundamentally store its CAD models as text, for a few reasons.

**Text is readable**. Humans cannot read binary data (except for that one weird kid who always came
first in your CS program and was immediately hired by an unknown government agency upon graduating).
People can’t just read a SolidWorks or OBJ file and keep a clear understanding of all the different
parts being designed. But KCL is readable. Models are represented with human-friendly names like
`cube = extrude(square, 10)` or `chessboard = gridPattern([8, 8], tile)`. Sure, code can take a
while to get used to, but this is much more readable than indecipherable binary data like
02357fa35bbc.

**Text is collaborative**. There’s already a huge ecosystem of software that lets you collaborate on
text. You can collaborate in real-time over Google Docs, or asynchronously by sending each other
Word documents with Track Changes showing revisions. You can add comments to other people’s text.
And that’s just the beginning. Software engineers have spent decades understanding how to resolve
conflicts in text editing. There’s a whole ecosystem of powerful tools that track and resolve
conflicts when the same text is edited by multiple people. Generally these algorithms don’t work on
binary data (or at least, not as well), and their results cannot be audited by humans because humans
can’t read binary. Using text allows us to hook into the existing suite of text collaboration tools.

**Text is machine-readable and machine-produceable**. The LLM and AI economy is all anyone can talk
about right now, which is not necessarily good. A lot of LLM applications are being massively
overhyped. Nobody needs an AI-powered mouse or toaster. But behind the hype lies a genuine huge
advance in text processing algorithms. The research behind LLMs has made it easier than ever to let
machines read and comprehend human text, and generate their own text in response. You don’t have to
buy into AI hype to see that computers ability to read and write English has massively advanced over
the last several years. By representing geometry as text, KCL can reuse the rapidly-growing
ecosystem of machine text tools – LLMS, summarizers, AI coding assistants, etc. This means LLMs can
generate KCL from a human prompt, explain the purpose behind some line of code, or improve your KCL
code for you. Currently AI language models are far, far ahead of AI graphical models, or binary
models, or specialized models trained on the specifics of other file formats. By storing 3D designs
as text rather than binary, KCL ironically lets these applications understand geometry better than
storing it in a traditional 3D file.

So, we felt confident that Zoo fundamentally needed to use text as its model. But there are many
text formats that aren’t full programming languages. Why must Zoo store its model specifically as
code?

## 3 Advantages of Code: Parametricity and Reusability

Code solves two big problems with traditional CAD suites: representing parametricity and reusing
common components.

**Code is inherently parametric**. Software engineers don’t just write a program as a big list of
instructions from top to bottom. They break code into several reusable functions that solve a
problem. Similarly, top-tier mechanical designers don’t tend to model a gear with its pitch diameter
and pressure angle included as static, 'magic' values in their CAD system. Instead, they design a
gear which is defined by some _parameters_; for example, its module (or diametrical pitch), its
pressure angle, and its number of teeth. That way, when the system requirements change, the engineer
can adjust the design parameters and watch as their parameters feed through their parameterized
calculations, and the rest of their gear design reflows to meet this new constraint.

This is doable but somewhat awkward in existing CAD products. It’s difficult to tell which
dimensions are driving the design and which are driven by it. It’s hard to know where the model will
break when parameters are varied. On the other hand, code is a natural fit for parametric design.
When you break your code into functions, those functions are inherently parametric – that’s why they
accept parameters! A function like `gear(module, nTeeth, aPressure)` obviously declares which
parameters it accepts. Comments and documentation explain what each parameter is and how it’s used —
serving to capture design intent in a way that is not readily achievable with traditional CAD
workflows. Constants can be defined once, at the top of a file, and used as parameters into many
different parts. Parametric functions can easily call other parametric functions and pass through
their constants.

For example, a designer building a server rack could define constants for both the height of a
server rack, and the number of server sleds. Then the height of each server rack can be easily
calculated (i.e. totalHeight / numSleds). The function for designing a single server sled would
accept this height as a parameter. Then when the total height of the rack changes, or the number of
sleds changes, the model is easily recalculated. Designers can clearly trace these constants and
visually follow them throughout the code, seeing where they’re calculated and how they’re used by
other functions.

**Code enables efficient reuse**. In the example above, each server rack is a copy of the others. If
you have 20 servers in a server rack, and each server has 8 memory sticks, and each memory stick has
8 controllers, then you have 1280 total memory controllers in your model. The more complex your
model becomes, the slower it is to use. It would be very wasteful for CAD software to just copy this
controller 1280 times – the user’s computer would need to hold all 1280 copies in its limited GPU,
CPU and memory. Instead, most software would notice that the controller unit is repeated, and only
store 1 copy of it. It would tag the remaining 1279 as just a copy, and efficiently reuse the
original. This is called “instancing” and it’s a powerful technique to make large, complex models
without slowing down the user’s computer.

Unfortunately, instancing is difficult. In CAD it’s hard to know when two things are exactly copies
of each other. Even when CAD software can do instancing properly, usually the file formats you save
or export to won’t understand instancing. So when you save your file, it has to write out 1280
copies of that memory controller, and then load them all back in when you next open the software.
This frustrates engineers to no end. Waiting an hour for your file to load is unacceptable.

In contrast, in a _functional programming language_ it’s always clear when a calculation can be
reused. Functions called with the same inputs will produce the same outputs. So whenever you call
server(height), as long as its parameters are the same, the output will be the same. This will allow
Zoo to efficiently cache and reuse parts of models. Right now we haven’t actually implemented this,
but we’ve architected it to make it easy in the future.

By storing Zoo files as text, Zoo enables engineers to collaborate and understand what their models
actually are. Programmable code lets you break down complicated models into smaller, simpler parts
and reuse them efficiently. This is why we built KCL.

## 4 Current Implementation and Workflow

KCL is available now in our Zoo app and our command-line tool. You can use KCL to define geometry
for your models. The typical workflow is:

-   Make a single part
    -   Use your mouse to start a sketch on some plane, dragging lines around with our interactive
        visual editor.
    -   This generates KCL code, which you can view
    -   Turn those 2D sketches into 3D solids with point-and-click tools like Extrude, Revolve, Sweep,
        and apply fillets to them
-   Assemble a larger part
    -   Move your single part into a function, and identify which constants should really be parameters
    -   Rephrase your specific part into a parametric part
    -   Call the function with different parameters, or start new parts

KCL has a standard library with common geometry tools like various kinds of lines, or operations on
2D and 3D geometry like Revolve and Fillet and Pattern. It also has the standard math tools you know
and love from normal programming, so you don’t need a calculator open in another window. All your
calculations can be written in KCL. To check your work, view each constant’s value in the Variables
pane, or use an `assert` statement to ensure an error gets printed if your math was wrong.

## 5 Core Design Principles

KCL is a functional programming language because we believe existing programming languages are
ill-suited to representing 3D geometry. Rather than reacting to changes or slowly updating a model
as changes occur, KCL just _defines_ your geometry. Variables are not updated or looped over.
Instead, use higher-level features like _patterns_ to replicate your geometry. This enables more
powerful IDE features (like clicking on an edge in your 3D viewer to highlight the exact location in
the code that defined that edge). In the future, it will allow us to efficiently reuse calculations
instead of redoing them.

## 6 Current Limitations and Future Direction

KCL has several conflicting goals. It has to be easy and intuitive for mechanical engineers who
haven’t coded much. But it has to be powerful enough to express complicated ideas from advanced
programmers too. It’s difficult to serve both beginners and experts. We have a long way to go on
making KCL friendlier to beginners in particular. We are excited to do user testing, find the pain
points beginners experience, and tackle each one so that beginners have an easier time with KCL.

One limitation KCL has is that it has fairly limited support for geometric constraints. That's
something we need to improve, because constraints are key tools for mechanical engineers. They let
engineers declare what they want (e.g. two sides to be the same length) instead of calculating the
exact numbers to make it happen. Post-launch we'll be working hard on improving KCL's constraint
system, so engineers spend less time doing math and more time designing products
