content/posts/introducing-text-to-cad.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Introducing Text-to-CAD'
excerpt: 'Introducing our machine learning model for generating CAD models from a text prompt.'
coverImage: '/kittycad-long.png'
date: '2023-12-18T15:35:07.322Z'
author:
    name: Jessie Frazelle
    picture: '/jessfraz.jpg'
ogImage:
    url: '/meta-images/introducing-text-to-cad.jpg'
---

Today we are excited to share [Text-to-CAD](https://text-to-cad.zoo.dev) with you! 
This is an alpha launch for us to 
get feedback and make the underlying model even better. For every seemingly 
obvious prompt that should work and doesn’t, we hope there is a prompt that
shouldn’t work but does!

There are lots of text-to-3d models that exist for gaming asset use cases but
there are no Text-to-CAD models. The distinction being that we do not use point
clouds, we generate B-Rep[^1] surfaces. So you can import a STEP file from Text-to-CAD
into any existing CAD program and edit it. The existing text-to-3d models 
generate meshes so if you were to import that into an existing CAD program,
it would just be one large amorphous blob and not editable in any useful way.

Generating CAD models is a lot different than generating images or video. Models
generating 2D images, 2D video, and 3D point clouds are learning from datasets
with dense, highly descriptive and strict representations of data that each
have one and only one representation. In contrast, there are multiple valid
feature trees for each CAD model, so training and validation are not 
straightforward.

We ask that you try different things and use the thumbs up and down buttons 
to give us feedback. By opening this up for use by the community, we can see 
the models you are trying to generate and improve the model for those.

Today, you can take the generated STEP file of any CAD model from Text-to-CAD 
and import it into an existing CAD program and edit it. Even more exciting, in 
the future, we will give you the generated KCL (KittyCAD Language) code so that
you can edit it in our [Modeling App](https://zoo.dev/modeling-app/download)!
Being able to edit code for a CAD model
will make generated models even more useful. You can keep up with the Modeling
App 1.0 roadmap [here](https://github.com/KittyCAD/modeling-app/issues/729).

Here are some fun models we’ve generated:

- "involute helical gear with 36 teeth"

![involute helical gear with 36 teeth](/images/text-to-cad/gear.png)

- "a 9 pointed star"

![a 9 pointed star](/images/text-to-cad/star.png)

- "create a plate with 4 holes near each corner and rounded corners"

![create a plate with 4 holes near each corner and rounded corners](/images/text-to-cad/plate.png)

- And one we thought was funny, tis the season: "a sketch of a christmas tree with a star on top"

![a sketch of a christmas tree with a star on top](/images/text-to-cad/tree.png)

- A fun one using emoji in discord...

![gear with teeth](/images/text-to-cad/discord-gear.png)

- One in french, "un cube avec un chamfer du bord haut"

![un cube avec un chamfer du bord haut](/images/text-to-cad/french-cube.png)

Pro tips: It is better to describe the feature tree of what you want (chamfered edges,
fillets, etc) versus just saying a noun (car).

We cannot wait to see what you generate! You can use our 
[discord bot](https://discord.gg/JQEpHR7Nt2) or the 
[Text-to-CAD UI](https://text-to-cad.zoo.dev) to try it out today.
[Both](https://github.com/KittyCAD/text-to-cad-ui) of 
these [applications](https://github.com/KittyCAD/text-to-cad-discord-bot) are 
open source so you can see how easy it is to build your 
own applications on top of our API. Have fun and remember to leave feedback, 
that will help us tremendously!



[^1]: B-Rep, or Boundary Representation, succinctly defines 3D objects using surfaces composed of vertices, edges, and faces, outlining their external shape. Unlike implicit modeling, B-Rep provides precise control over the object's geometry and topology, facilitating accurate and efficient design modifications, essential for manufacturing processes where exact dimensions and tolerances are crucial.

Commit message:

Oops forgot the most import blog post meta-image (#536)
* Oops forgot the most import blog post meta-image

* Missed two others

I wish they had been named with `blog-` first grumble grumble winge

content/posts/introducing-text-to-cad.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Introducing Text-to-CAD'
excerpt: 'Introducing our machine learning model for generating CAD models from a text prompt.'
coverImage: '/kittycad-long.png'
date: '2023-12-18T15:35:07.322Z'
author:
    name: Jessie Frazelle
    picture: '/jessfraz.jpg'
ogImage:
    url: 'documentation-assets/meta-images/zoo-text-to-cad-jess-blog.jpg'
---

Today we are excited to share [Text-to-CAD](https://text-to-cad.zoo.dev) with you!
This is an alpha launch for us to
get feedback and make the underlying model even better. For every seemingly
obvious prompt that should work and doesn’t, we hope there is a prompt that
shouldn’t work but does!

There are lots of text-to-3d models that exist for gaming asset use cases but
there are no Text-to-CAD models. The distinction being that we do not use point
clouds, we generate B-Rep[^1] surfaces. So you can import a STEP file from Text-to-CAD
into any existing CAD program and edit it. The existing text-to-3d models
generate meshes so if you were to import that into an existing CAD program,
it would just be one large amorphous blob and not editable in any useful way.

Generating CAD models is a lot different than generating images or video. Models
generating 2D images, 2D video, and 3D point clouds are learning from datasets
with dense, highly descriptive and strict representations of data that each
have one and only one representation. In contrast, there are multiple valid
feature trees for each CAD model, so training and validation are not
straightforward.

We ask that you try different things and use the thumbs up and down buttons
to give us feedback. By opening this up for use by the community, we can see
the models you are trying to generate and improve the model for those.

Today, you can take the generated STEP file of any CAD model from Text-to-CAD
and import it into an existing CAD program and edit it. Even more exciting, in
the future, we will give you the generated KCL (KittyCAD Language) code so that
you can edit it in our [Modeling App](https://zoo.dev/modeling-app/download)!
Being able to edit code for a CAD model
will make generated models even more useful. You can keep up with the Modeling
App 1.0 roadmap [here](https://github.com/KittyCAD/modeling-app/issues/729).

Here are some fun models we’ve generated:

- "involute helical gear with 36 teeth"

![involute helical gear with 36 teeth](/images/text-to-cad/gear.png)

- "a 9 pointed star"

![a 9 pointed star](/images/text-to-cad/star.png)

- "create a plate with 4 holes near each corner and rounded corners"

![create a plate with 4 holes near each corner and rounded corners](/images/text-to-cad/plate.png)

- And one we thought was funny, tis the season: "a sketch of a christmas tree with a star on top"

![a sketch of a christmas tree with a star on top](/images/text-to-cad/tree.png)

- A fun one using emoji in discord...

![gear with teeth](/images/text-to-cad/discord-gear.png)

- One in french, "un cube avec un chamfer du bord haut"

![un cube avec un chamfer du bord haut](/images/text-to-cad/french-cube.png)

Pro tips: It is better to describe the feature tree of what you want (chamfered edges,
fillets, etc) versus just saying a noun (car).

We cannot wait to see what you generate! You can use our
[discord bot](https://discord.gg/JQEpHR7Nt2) or the
[Text-to-CAD UI](https://text-to-cad.zoo.dev) to try it out today.
[Both](https://github.com/KittyCAD/text-to-cad-ui) of
these [applications](https://github.com/KittyCAD/text-to-cad-discord-bot) are
open source so you can see how easy it is to build your
own applications on top of our API. Have fun and remember to leave feedback,
that will help us tremendously!

[^1]: B-Rep, or Boundary Representation, succinctly defines 3D objects using surfaces composed of vertices, edges, and faces, outlining their external shape. Unlike implicit modeling, B-Rep provides precise control over the object's geometry and topology, facilitating accurate and efficient design modifications, essential for manufacturing processes where exact dimensions and tolerances are crucial.
