---
title: 'Moonshot'
excerpt: |
    Let's build a telescope!
coverImage: 'documentation-assets/moonshot.jpg'
date: '2024-09-23T15:00:00Z'
author:
    name: Paul Tagliamonte
    picture: '/documentation-assets/paultag.jpg'
ogImage:
    url: 'documentation-assets/moonshot.jpg'
---

At Zoo we aren’t afraid of a moonshot. We’ve repeatedly made decisions that
seem, to the outside observer, like a moonshot. Our vision for the future was
limited by existing platforms and tools, and we’ve taken on massive technical
undertakings – making our vision real – unlocking that future. When you think
about it, that’s the trick, isn’t it – going after problems through persistent,
steady and clear-eyed focus on the goal. There’s no substitute for persistent,
hard work.

We’ve been busy at work getting the Zoo Modeling App ready for increasingly
complex workloads over the last year, step by step. We’ve been landing critical
features to our CAD Engine, developing KCL language features, and polishing the
UI/UX for real customer workflows. As we get closer to stabilizing our 1.0
release, it was the perfect time to start up a “Hardware startup inside a
software startup” – a small team focused on using ZMA to produce real hardware.
A perfect chance to build hardware while leaning into KCL best practices,
conventions and idioms. We found ourselves in need of a large, fairly complex
project to stress test new features, internally drive development on blocking
issues our users would reasonably have, have something to demo in the app to
show off our more complex features, and finally, to push us to think through
what happens when we go to manufacture designed parts “beyond the engine”.

Almost immediately, I got the idea to build a refractor Telescope – going for a
literal shot of the moon –  in my head and kept coming back to it. It’s well
understood science, just the right amount of complexity (in terms of spacings,
tolerances, gears), Astronomy has a really cool amateur DIY scene, and a
telescope is something satisfying you can hold and use in the real world. Only
hiccup – I don’t know anything about telescopes (in particular), optics (in
general), or even how to CAD something. That’s right, I’d never so much as
opened a CAD program until starting at Zoo – and the only CAD software I’ve
used to date is the Zoo Modeling App. Throughout my first year at Zoo, I’ve
mostly been working on deep [backend](https://zoo.dev/blog/introducing-delouse)
or [infrastructural](https://zoo.dev/blog/fixing-an-h264-encoding-bug) bugs
that generally haven’t required any knowledge of how to actually use the CAD
software beyond making a cube or two. I figured it was high time to change
that.

I got right to it, reading astronomy papers, amateur astronomy blogs, websites,
videos, and lurking a few communities. After all that, I got to work, starting
on paper (ok, “paper” – actually an e-reader), moving to ZMA to model a part at
a time. It took a few hours of making parts that looked good in the App, and a
coworker was nice enough to use their 3D printer to build them, and ship me a
few parts (thanks, Adam!). A few weeks of iteration (and one purchased 3D
printer later!) and I wound up with a working telescope using 3-D printed
parts, a 2mm metal rod, a 3” PVC tube, and a 2.5” plastic tube.

![Picture of the 3D printed telescope. It has a pink spray-painted Zoo logo across the top](/documentation-assets/moonshot/scope.jpg)

I’m hoping to spend some time building these parts using more professional
materials next, but given we were able to demonstrate a working prototype, this
blog post is going up well in advance of our final version.

This was nice and all, but it used an off-the-shelf eyepiece – a very nice
lens, but a lens that wasn’t one we modeled or built. I didn’t like the idea of
us calling it quits while using an off-the-shelf eyepiece – so I got down to
work building a simple Plössl-style eyepiece that works with the IMX477-based
Raspberry Pi HQ camera. This means that I can – in true Zoo fashion – do my
Astronomy via Software, streaming lower resolution video for interactive use
(focusing and centering objects of interest), and taking 4K full-resolution
photographs after the field of view is dialed in.

![A Raspberry Pi camera module attached to a 3D printed Plossl style lens, fitting the typical 1 1/4" telescope eyepiece](/documentation-assets/moonshot/plossl.jpg)

I got all this done JUST time for the “Super Blue Moon” – only to be foiled by
cloud cover. I think this is why all the Amateur Astronomy folks sign off with
“Clear Skies” – sometimes you’re just plain at the mercy of the weather.

Thankfully, the weather let up the next day, giving me a perfect night to see
the almost-Super Blue Moon. After processing the images, I’ve noticed a few
fairly obvious problems with the system – such as the Refractor’s collimation
is very far off – that I’m hoping to fix for the next version. That being said,
the photos this Telescope produced vastly exceeded my expectations, which I’m
very proud of. I can’t wait to continue to iterate on this design, and see if I
can get rid of all of the obvious optical aberrations enough to take a quality
photo in a nice dark area. All in all, not bad for a very simple Telescope in
the middle of a light polluted city!

![Picture of the moon! You can make out craters on the lefthand side of the image.](/documentation-assets/moonshot/moonshot.jpg)

With that we’re also planning on pushing the KCL in-progress up to our GitHub
once the last features land, which we’ll continue to iterate on, and maintain –
to serve as an idiomatic project and adopter of new features as they get
released. More on that soon!

If you’ve found this post interesting, you would fit right in at Zoo! Come join
us, or build something great using any of the Zoo APIs – while we don’t do
professional Astronomy, we are building the future of hardware design by
tackling the hardest infrastructure problems facing the industry today so
hardware teams can focus on designing the next big thing – not fighting with
their tools.

Clear Skies!
