content/posts/signal-sidequest-morse-key.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Signal sidequest'
excerpt: |
    Engineering documentation and making a one-part Morse key your computer can understand.
coverImage: '/documentation-assets/zoo-banner.png'
date: '2025-04-02'
author:
    name: Nick McCleery
    picture: '/documentation-assets/nickmccleery.jpg'
ogImage:
    url: 'documentation-assets/why-i-joined-zoo/why-i-joined-zoo.png'
---

## Why a Morse key?

I was looking for a simple project to use as an excuse to develop some procedure and
documentation templates, and when I discovered one of our colleagues is a ham radio
aficionado, I thought a simple Morse key would be a fun reintroduction to some mechanical
engineering workload. Given that I've now spent most of the last decade exclusively 
working on software systems of one sort or another, a soft start like this
seemed perfect.

The Morse key would give me the opportunity to do a bunch of things I was keen to get
on top of, like:
- Building my familiarity with the Zoo modelling app.
- Ironing out a neat workflow for using FEA tools with geometry built in Zoo.
- Stress testing my thinking on documentation and reporting.
- Getting to grips with my new Bambu printer.

On top of that, it would give me an excuse to play with a microcontroller for the first
time since I built a MIDI drum sequencer some years ago... and hopefully I could pick
up some Morse code along the way too.

## The mechanical bit

This project is a bit 'Mickey Mouse' from a mechanical perspective: it's a single part,
3D printed, subject to basically no load. The actual geometry of the part that I ended
up hooking up to the Arduino is shown below... complete with the sort of external corner
radii that were broadly illegal when I was designing things that had to be machined.

![morse-key](/documentation-assets/signal-sidequest-morse-key/MorseKey.png)

But before I got there via some rapid (and undocumented) iteration, I did actually
work through a proper design process, and I have written up both the design work
and experimental validation of this thing. In both cases, that documentation
follows what I think is a good basis for a document-centric engineering workflow.


### Finite elements, near-infinite limitations

Below is the 'Product Design Document' for the part. I'm a fan of documents like these,
first and foremost, because the act of writing up the design process forces the designer
to think through their work in a very structured way. It also provides a clear record
of design intent, and forms an educational resource for the next person
who picks up responsibility for the system. Beyond specific part and system documentation,
a template that has been iterated on and proven out will also help less experienced hires
build a mental model of what 'good' looks like.

In the case of the Morse key, the list of limitations related to the FEA approach is
almost as long as the rest of the report, but the structure of the document is really
what I was trying to work on here.

<embed src="/documentation-assets/signal-sidequest-morse-key/25P01-R01V01-InitialDesignDocumentation.pdf"
width="100%" height="1000px"
 type="application/pdf"/>

### M12s and MDF

The simpler document below describes the experimental validation procedure. The last time
I did anything this, I had spent several weeks developing a prototype suspension system
concept for an F1 car, and was in the process of running through a test programme I'd
assembled to try and validate my hand-coded models. In that scenario, I had the luxury of
several Servotest load frames to choose from, but this time... I made do with an M12 bolt
and some kitchen scales, all sat on a 9mm thick piece of MDF on my dining table.

<embed src="/documentation-assets/signal-sidequest-morse-key/25P01-R02V01-ExperimentalDesignValidation.pdf"
width="100%" height="1000px"
 type="application/pdf"/>



## To the microcontroller

The microcontroller aspect was pretty straightforward. I just needed to detect a
closed circuit when the key was pressed, then come up with some mechanism for
differentiating dots from dashes.

Wanting to structure the code in a somewhat flexible way, I went with
[PlatformIO](https://platformio.org/) and VSCode over the Arduino IDE, and settled on
a project layout like this:

```
src
├── LedManager.cpp
├── LedManager.h
├── MorseTranslator.cpp
├── MorseTranslator.h
├── constants.h
├── main.cpp
└── morse_table.h
```

The body of the logic is handled by the `MorseTranslator` class, which handles the
closed circuit detection and the translation of the signal into a keystroke. The
other files really just exist to support that; defining parameters and controlling
the onboard LED.

In terms of how it actually works:
- The Morse key's contacts are connected to a digital input pin.
- When the key is pressed, the pin is pulled low, and current time recorded.
- When the key is released, the duration is compared to a threshold to classify it as 
  either a dot or a dash.
- Each dot or dash is appended to a buffer, which represents a single Morse character.
- After a short gap, the buffer is matched against a lookup table and the corresponding
  character is written out as a keystroke using `Keyboard.write()`.

We also have a buzzer that beeps when the key is pressed, and an LED that both blinks
to indicate the program is running, and lights up when the key is pressed. 

The parameterisation, given in `constants.h`, is as follows:

```cpp
#ifndef CONSTANTS_H
#define CONSTANTS_H

namespace Constants {
// Serial.
constexpr int SERIAL_BAUD = 9600;

// Pin assignments.
constexpr int ID_PIN_READ = 7; // Leonardo.
constexpr int ID_PIN_LED  = LED_BUILTIN;
constexpr int ID_PIN_BUZZER = 3; // PWM pin, Leonardo.

// Buzzer freq.
constexpr int BUZZER_FREQ = 600; // Hz.

// Timing parameters, milliseconds.
constexpr unsigned long DURATION_DOT     = 100;
constexpr unsigned long DURATION_DASH    = DURATION_DOT * 3;
constexpr unsigned long GAP_INTER_LETTER = DURATION_DOT * 3;
constexpr unsigned long GAP_INTER_WORD   = DURATION_DOT * 7;

// Debounce parameters.
constexpr unsigned long DEBOUNCE_DELAY = 20;

// Buffer limits.
constexpr int MAX_BUFFER_SIZE = 20;
} // namespace Constants

#endif
```

As assembled, including electrical war crimes, this is what it looked like:

![morse-key-assembled](/documentation-assets/signal-sidequest-morse-key/arduino.jpg)

<video 
  width="100%" 
  controls
  muted
  loop
>
  <source src="/documentation-assets/signal-sidequest-morse-key/arduino.webm" type="video/webm" />
  Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

In the video, the `HI` message is being sent into Notepad... so you can actually
(sort of) use it as an input device. 


## Introducing Morsdle

![morsdle](/documentation-assets/signal-sidequest-morse-key/MorsdleOG.png)

At this point, I'd designed, printed, and tested the part. I'd also written the code required
to make an Arduino interpret the signal and feed that to my computer as a keystroke. I
could successfully send an 'A' or a 'B' and watch it appear in my text editor of choice,
but I still didn't actually know Morse code.

Sat on a train from Belfast to Dublin on evening, I spent a bit of time looking for web
pages that offered some kind of Morse code practice, and generally didn't find anything
quite right. This formed an opportunity and an interesting challenge: could I build a
relatively entertaining mechanism for teaching myself Morse code?

Feeding an LLM my Arduino code and some specific preferences with respect to frontend
stack, I was able to hustle together the first version of
[morsdle.com](https://www.morsdle.com) within a few hours. The website was live the next
day.

## STOP

This was a small and simple project, but it gave me a chance to exercise some engineering
workflow: design, simulation, testing, embedded code development, and documenting
the process. Plus, if you consider Morsdle to meet the definition of a game, that's
also the first game I've ever built.

Commit message:

Update reports with ISO formatted date and add open source projects.

content/posts/signal-sidequest-morse-key.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Signal sidequest'
excerpt: |
    Engineering documentation and making a one-part Morse key your computer can understand.
coverImage: '/documentation-assets/zoo-banner.png'
date: '2025-04-03'
author:
    name: Nick McCleery
    picture: '/documentation-assets/nickmccleery.jpg'
ogImage:
    url: 'documentation-assets/why-i-joined-zoo/why-i-joined-zoo.png'
---

## Why a Morse key?

I was looking for a simple project to use as an excuse to develop some procedure and
documentation templates, and when I discovered one of our colleagues is a ham radio
aficionado, I thought a simple Morse key would be a fun reintroduction to some mechanical
engineering workload. Given that I've now spent most of the last decade exclusively 
working on software systems of one sort or another, a soft start like this
seemed perfect.

The Morse key would give me the opportunity to do a bunch of things I was keen to get
on top of, like:
- Building my familiarity with the Zoo modelling app.
- Ironing out a neat workflow for using FEA tools with geometry built in Zoo.
- Stress testing my thinking on documentation and reporting.
- Getting to grips with my new Bambu printer.

On top of that, it would give me an excuse to play with a microcontroller for the first
time since I built a MIDI drum sequencer some years ago... and hopefully I could pick
up some Morse code along the way too.

## The mechanical bit

This project is a bit 'Mickey Mouse' from a mechanical perspective: it's a single part,
3D printed, subject to basically no load. The actual geometry of the part that I ended
up hooking up to the Arduino is shown below... complete with the sort of external corner
radii that were broadly illegal when I was designing things that had to be machined.

![morse-key](/documentation-assets/signal-sidequest-morse-key/MorseKey.png)

But before I got there via some rapid (and undocumented) iteration, I did actually
work through a proper design process, and I have written up both the design work
and experimental validation of this thing. In both cases, that documentation
follows what I think is a good basis for a document-centric engineering workflow.


### Finite elements, near-infinite limitations

Below is the 'Product Design Document' for the part. I'm a fan of documents like these,
first and foremost, because the act of writing up the design process forces the designer
to think through their work in a very structured way. It also provides a clear record
of design intent, and forms an educational resource for the next person
who picks up responsibility for the system. Beyond specific part and system documentation,
a template that has been iterated on and proven out will also help less experienced hires
build a mental model of what 'good' looks like.

In the case of the Morse key, the list of limitations related to the FEA approach is
almost as long as the rest of the report, but the structure of the document is really
what I was trying to work on here.

<embed src="/documentation-assets/signal-sidequest-morse-key/25P01-R01V01-InitialDesignDocumentation.pdf"
width="100%" height="1000px"
 type="application/pdf"/>

### M12s and MDF

The simpler document below describes the experimental validation procedure. The last time
I did anything this, I had spent several weeks developing a prototype suspension system
concept for an F1 car, and was in the process of running through a test programme I'd
assembled to try and validate my hand-coded models. In that scenario, I had the luxury of
several Servotest load frames to choose from, but this time... I made do with an M12 bolt
and some kitchen scales, all sat on a 9mm thick piece of MDF on my dining table.

<embed src="/documentation-assets/signal-sidequest-morse-key/25P01-R02V01-ExperimentalDesignValidation.pdf"
width="100%" height="1000px"
 type="application/pdf"/>



## To the microcontroller

The microcontroller aspect was pretty straightforward. I just needed to detect a
closed circuit when the key was pressed, then come up with some mechanism for
differentiating dots from dashes.

Wanting to structure the code in a somewhat flexible way, I went with
[PlatformIO](https://platformio.org/) and VSCode over the Arduino IDE, and settled on
a project layout like this:

```
src
├── LedManager.cpp
├── LedManager.h
├── MorseTranslator.cpp
├── MorseTranslator.h
├── constants.h
├── main.cpp
└── morse_table.h
```

The body of the logic is handled by the `MorseTranslator` class, which handles the
closed circuit detection and the translation of the signal into a keystroke. The
other files really just exist to support that; defining parameters and controlling
the onboard LED.

In terms of how it actually works:
- The Morse key's contacts are connected to a digital input pin.
- When the key is pressed, the pin is pulled low, and current time recorded.
- When the key is released, the duration is compared to a threshold to classify it as 
  either a dot or a dash.
- Each dot or dash is appended to a buffer, which represents a single Morse character.
- After a short gap, the buffer is matched against a lookup table and the corresponding
  character is written out as a keystroke using `Keyboard.write()`.

We also have a buzzer that beeps when the key is pressed, and an LED that both blinks
to indicate the program is running, and lights up when the key is pressed. 

The parameterisation, given in `constants.h`, is as follows:

```cpp
#ifndef CONSTANTS_H
#define CONSTANTS_H

namespace Constants {
// Serial.
constexpr int SERIAL_BAUD = 9600;

// Pin assignments.
constexpr int ID_PIN_READ = 7; // Leonardo.
constexpr int ID_PIN_LED  = LED_BUILTIN;
constexpr int ID_PIN_BUZZER = 3; // PWM pin, Leonardo.

// Buzzer freq.
constexpr int BUZZER_FREQ = 600; // Hz.

// Timing parameters, milliseconds.
constexpr unsigned long DURATION_DOT     = 100;
constexpr unsigned long DURATION_DASH    = DURATION_DOT * 3;
constexpr unsigned long GAP_INTER_LETTER = DURATION_DOT * 3;
constexpr unsigned long GAP_INTER_WORD   = DURATION_DOT * 7;

// Debounce parameters.
constexpr unsigned long DEBOUNCE_DELAY = 20;

// Buffer limits.
constexpr int MAX_BUFFER_SIZE = 20;
} // namespace Constants

#endif
```

The full code is also available in the 
[project-morse-key](https://github.com/KittyCAD/project-morse-key) repo.

As assembled, including electrical war crimes, this is what it looked like:

![morse-key-assembled](/documentation-assets/signal-sidequest-morse-key/arduino.jpg)

<video 
  width="100%" 
  controls
  muted
  loop
>
  <source src="/documentation-assets/signal-sidequest-morse-key/arduino.webm" type="video/webm" />
  Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

In the video, the `HI` message is being sent into Notepad... so you can actually
(sort of) use it as an input device. 


## Introducing Morsdle

![morsdle](/documentation-assets/signal-sidequest-morse-key/MorsdleOG.png)

At this point, I'd designed, printed, and tested the part. I'd also written the code required
to make an Arduino interpret the signal and feed that to my computer as a keystroke. I
could successfully send an 'A' or a 'B' and watch it appear in my text editor of choice,
but I still didn't actually know Morse code.

Sat on a train from Belfast to Dublin on evening, I spent a bit of time looking for web
pages that offered some kind of Morse code practice, and generally didn't find anything
quite right. This formed an opportunity and an interesting challenge: could I build a
relatively entertaining mechanism for teaching myself Morse code?

Feeding an LLM my Arduino code and some specific preferences with respect to frontend
stack, I was able to hustle together the first version of
[morsdle.com](https://www.morsdle.com) within a few hours. The website was live the next
day.

## STOP

This was a small and simple project, but it gave me a chance to exercise some engineering
workflow: design, simulation, testing, embedded code development, and documenting
the process. Plus, if you consider Morsdle to meet the definition of a game, that's
also the first game I've ever built.

## Appendix: resources

We're also happy to open-source several projects that were either used or
assembled in the course of this work:

- [Zooplotlib](https://github.com/KittyCAD/zooplotlib): Our formerly internal 
  python package that makes distributing and using matplotlib style sheets easy.
- [Zooplotly](https://github.com/KittyCAD/zooplotly): Similar to the above, a formerly
  internal python package for styling plotly figures.
- [project-template](https://github.com/KittyCAD/project-template): A template repository
  for mechanical engineering projects, including a set of LaTeX report templates for
  design, simulation/analysis, and experimental work.
- [project-morse-key](https://github.com/KittyCAD/project-morse-key): As sharded above,
  the full project repository for this work.
