content/posts/text-to-cad-blender-addon.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Text-to-CAD Add-on For Blender'
excerpt: |
    Introducing our Blender add-on utilizing our Text-to-CAD API.
coverImage: '/documentation-assets/zoo-banner.png'
date: '2024-03-18T12:00:00Z'
author:
    name: Ryan Barton
    picture: '/documentation-assets/ryanbarton.jpg'
ogImage:
    url: 'documentation-assets/meta-images/text-to-cad-blender-blog.jpg'
---

Today we are introducing our [Text-to-CAD add-on for Blender](https://github.com/KittyCAD/text-to-cad-blender-addon). In the world of digital design and 3D modeling, the bridge between conceptualization and realization is crucial. Powered by [Zoo.dev](https://zoo.dev/)'s [ML-ephant Machine Learning API](https://zoo.dev/docs/developer-tools/api/ml), this add-on allows users to generate CAD models directly from text descriptions.
### What is Text-to-CAD?
So glad you asked! Our CEO Jessie Frazelle has actually already written a nice [blog post](/blog/introducing-text-to-cad) describing our Text-to-CAD technology.

TL;DR Text-to-CAD transforms text into editable CAD models, distinct from 3D meshes by generating B-Rep surfaces for compatibility with CAD programs.
### Getting Started
To use the Text-to-CAD Blender add-on, users need to have [Blender](https://www.blender.org/) installed and acquire an [API token from Zoo.dev](https://zoo.dev/account/developer). The add-on is straightforward to set up and use, making the transition from concept to CAD model smoother and faster than traditional methods.
### Key Features
- **Easy Integration**: Fits smoothly into the native Blender workflow of installing add-ons and includes a keyboard shortcut.
- **Multiple Formats**: Supports various output formats, catering to different project requirements. The files generated by this plugin and Text-to-CAD are always available from your [dashboard](https://text-to-cad.zoo.dev/dashboard).
- **User-Friendly**: Designed for ease of use, requiring only a text prompt and a few selections to generate a model.
- **Open Source**: The Blender add-on is open source and ready for modification at your heart’s desire.

This is just the start of what you can you do with our ML-ephant and KittyCAD [APIs](https://zoo.dev/docs/api). Integrate into your own 3D modeling and CAD software of choice!
### Use Cases
The potential applications of the Text-to-CAD add-on are vast, touching upon multiple domains where rapid prototyping and design are essential.

We cannot wait to see what you generate! The Blender add-on is open source, so you can see how easy it is to build your own applications on top of our ML-ephant Machine Learning API. Have fun and remember to leave feedback, that will help us tremendously!

#### Using Text-to-CAD in Blender!

<Video speed={1} autoPlay={true} controls={true} loop={true} muted={true} src="/documentation-assets/blender-addon/text-to-cad-in-blender.mp4" />

#### Final Render

<Video speed={1} autoPlay={true} controls={true} loop={true} muted={true} src="/documentation-assets/blender-addon/zoo-blender-animation.mp4" />

Commit message:

Update Text-to-CAD links to app.zoo.dev
Replace references to text-to-cad.zoo.dev with app.zoo.dev across several blog posts and add a parenthetical note that Text-To-Cad has been replaced by Zookeeper (the conversational CAD agent in Zoo Design Studio). Also apply minor whitespace/EOF cleanups. Affected files: content/posts/introducing-text-to-cad.mdx, content/posts/text-to-cad-blender-addon.mdx, content/posts/turning-on-billing-for-text-to-cad.mdx, content/posts/whats-new-august.mdx.

content/posts/text-to-cad-blender-addon.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Text-to-CAD Add-on For Blender'
excerpt: |
    Introducing our Blender add-on utilizing our Text-to-CAD API.
coverImage: '/documentation-assets/zoo-banner.png'
date: '2024-03-18T12:00:00Z'
author:
    name: Ryan Barton
    picture: '/documentation-assets/ryanbarton.jpg'
ogImage:
    url: 'documentation-assets/meta-images/text-to-cad-blender-blog.jpg'
---

Today we are introducing our [Text-to-CAD add-on for Blender](https://github.com/KittyCAD/text-to-cad-blender-addon). In the world of digital design and 3D modeling, the bridge between conceptualization and realization is crucial. Powered by [Zoo.dev](https://zoo.dev/)'s [ML-ephant Machine Learning API](https://zoo.dev/docs/developer-tools/api/ml), this add-on allows users to generate CAD models directly from text descriptions.
### What is Text-to-CAD?
So glad you asked! Our CEO Jessie Frazelle has actually already written a nice [blog post](/blog/introducing-text-to-cad) describing our Text-to-CAD technology.

TL;DR Text-to-CAD transforms text into editable CAD models, distinct from 3D meshes by generating B-Rep surfaces for compatibility with CAD programs.
### Getting Started
To use the Text-to-CAD Blender add-on, users need to have [Blender](https://www.blender.org/) installed and acquire an [API token from Zoo.dev](https://zoo.dev/account/developer). The add-on is straightforward to set up and use, making the transition from concept to CAD model smoother and faster than traditional methods.
### Key Features
- **Easy Integration**: Fits smoothly into the native Blender workflow of installing add-ons and includes a keyboard shortcut.
- **Multiple Formats**: Supports various output formats, catering to different project requirements. The files generated by this plugin and Text-to-CAD are always available from your [dashboard](https://app.zoo.dev/). *(Text-To-Cad has been replaced by [Zookeeper](https://zoo.dev/zookeeper), the conversational CAD agent natively integrated into Zoo Design Studio.)*
- **User-Friendly**: Designed for ease of use, requiring only a text prompt and a few selections to generate a model.
- **Open Source**: The Blender add-on is open source and ready for modification at your heart’s desire.

This is just the start of what you can you do with our ML-ephant and KittyCAD [APIs](https://zoo.dev/docs/api). Integrate into your own 3D modeling and CAD software of choice!
### Use Cases
The potential applications of the Text-to-CAD add-on are vast, touching upon multiple domains where rapid prototyping and design are essential.

We cannot wait to see what you generate! The Blender add-on is open source, so you can see how easy it is to build your own applications on top of our ML-ephant Machine Learning API. Have fun and remember to leave feedback, that will help us tremendously!

#### Using Text-to-CAD in Blender!

<Video speed={1} autoPlay={true} controls={true} loop={true} muted={true} src="/documentation-assets/blender-addon/text-to-cad-in-blender.mp4" />

#### Final Render

<Video speed={1} autoPlay={true} controls={true} loop={true} muted={true} src="/documentation-assets/blender-addon/zoo-blender-animation.mp4" />
